Paper Title : A Contrastive CNN-Mamba Hybrid Framework for Self-Supervised Brain MRI Classification 
Submission : Asian Conference on Computer Vision (ACCV 2026)

Abstract : Manually annotating brain MRI images is labor-intensive and expensive. Self-supervised learning (SSL) is an approach that can reduce the need for a large amount of annotated data while achieving good performance in classification tasks. Recently, several self-supervised learning techniques have been proposed, but very few have been applied to brain MRI classification tasks and demonstrated good generalizability. Moreover, most existing methods use CNNs, which fail to capture global dependencies, or Vision Transformers (ViTs), which have quadratic computational complexity.To overcome these limitations, we proposed a contrastive learning-based self-supervised approach that brings samples from the same class closer together and pushes samples from different classes farther apart in the feature space. The feature representations are learned using a CNN–Mamba integrated base encoder. The Mamba block efficiently captures global contextual features with linear computational complexity, avoiding the quadratic complexity associated with Transformer-based self-attention. Furthermore, the integration of attention pooling enables the model to focus more on important regions. To demonstrate the generalizability of our model, we evaluated it on two independent brain MRI datasets and also performed cross-dataset evaluation by training on one dataset and testing on the other. We performed three types of downstream tasks: linear probing and machine learning classifiers with the pretrained encoder frozen, and full fine-tuning by updating all model weights. The results show that our model outperforms several baseline methods, including SimCLR, MAE, BYOL, and DINO. Ablation studies further confirm the effectiveness of the Mamba block in the encoder. On the Brisc 2025 dataset, our proposed model achieved an accuracy of 93.60\%, which is almost 6\% higher than the best baseline, SimCLR. During linear probing, the training times are 3.21 s and 2.43 s on the two datasets, respectively, which are the lowest among all baselines, demonstrating the efficiency of our proposed SSL approach.
